Source:  http://mcadams.posc.mu.edu/txt/ah/Livy/Livy01.html

[1.6]At the beginning of the fray, Numitor gave out that an enemy had entered 
the City and was attacking the palace, in order to draw off the Alban soldiery 
to the citadel, to defend it. When he saw the young men coming to congratulate 
him after the assassination, he at once called a council of his people and 
explained his brother's infamous conduct towards him, the story of his 
grandsons, their parentage and bringing up, and how he recognised them. Then he 
proceeded to inform them of the tyrant's death and his responsibility for it. 
The young men marched in order through the midst of the assembly and saluted 
their grandfather as king; their action was approved by the whole population, 
who with one voice ratified the title and sovereignty of the king. After the 
government of Alba was thus transferred to Numitor, Romulus and Remus were 
seized with the desire of building a city in the locality where they had been 
exposed. There was the superfluous population of the Alban and Latin towns, to 
these were added the shepherds: it was natural to hope that with all these Alba 
would be small and Lavinium small in comparison with the city which was to be 
founded. These pleasant anticipations were disturbed by the ancestral curse - 
ambition - which led to a deplorable quarrel over what was at first a trivial 
matter. As they were twins and no claim to precedence could be based on 
seniority, they decided to consult the tutelary deities of the place by means 
of augury as to who was to give his name to the new city, and who was to rule 
it after it had been founded. Romulus accordingly selected the Palatine as his 
station for observation, Remus the Aventine.

[1.7]Remus is said to have been the first to receive an omen: six vultures 
appeared to him. The augury had just been announced to Romulus when double the 
number appeared to him. Each was saluted as king by his own party. The one side 
based their claim on the priority of the appearance, the other on the number of 
the birds. Then followed an angry altercation; heated passions led to 
bloodshed; in the tumult Remus was killed. The more common report is that Remus 
contemptuously jumped over the newly raised walls and was forthwith killed by 
the enraged Romulus, who exclaimed, "So shall it be henceforth with every one 
who leaps over my walls." Romulus thus became sole ruler, and the city was 
called after him, its founder. His first work was to fortify the Palatine hill 
where he had been brought up. The worship of the other deities he conducted 
according to the use of Alba, but that of Hercules in accordance with the Greek 
rites as they had been instituted by Evander. It was into this neighbourhood, 
according to the tradition, that Hercules, after he had killed Geryon, drove 
his oxen, which were of marvellous beauty. He swam across the Tiber, driving 
the oxen before him, and wearied with his journey, lay down in a grassy place 
near the river to rest himself and the oxen, who enjoyed the rich pasture. When 
sleep had overtaken him, as he was heavy with food and wine, a shepherd living 
near, called Cacus, presuming on his strength, and captivated by the beauty of 
the oxen, determined to secure them. If he drove them before him into the cave, 
their hoof-marks would have led their owner on his search for them in the same 
direction, so he dragged the finest of them backwards by their tails into his 
cave. At the first streak of dawn Hercules awoke, and on surveying his herd saw 
that some were missing. He proceeded towards the nearest cave, to see if any 
tracks pointed in that direction, but he found that every hoof-mark led from 
the cave and none towards it. Perplexed and bewildered he began to drive the 
herd away from so dangerous a neighbourhood. Some of the cattle, missing those 
which were left behind, lowed as they often do, and an answering low sounded 
from the cave. Hercules turned in that direction, and as Cacus tried to prevent 
him by force from entering the cave, he was killed by a blow from Hercules' 
club, after vainly appealing for help to his comrades

The king of the country at that time was Evander, a refugee from Peloponnesus, 
who ruled more by personal ascendancy than by the exercise of power. He was 
looked up to with reverence for his knowledge of letters - a new and marvellous 
thing for uncivilised men - but he was still more revered because of his mother 
Carmenta, who was believed to be a divine being and regarded with wonder by all 
as an interpreter of Fate, in the days before the arrival of the Sibyl in 
Italy. This Evander, alarmed by the crowd of excited shepherds standing round a 
stranger whom they accused of open murder, ascertained from them the nature of 
his act and what led to it. As he observed the bearing and stature of the man 
to be more than human in greatness and august dignity, he asked who he was. 
When he heard his name, and learnt his father and his country he said, 
"Hercules, son of Jupiter, hail! My mother, who speaks truth in the name of the 
gods, has prophesied that thou shalt join the company of the gods, and that 
here a shrine shall be dedicated to thee, which in ages to come the most 
powerful nation in all the world shall call their Ara Maxima and honour with 
shine own special worship." Hercules grasped Evander's right hand and said that 
he took the omen to himself and would fulfil the prophecy by building and 
consecrating the altar. Then a heifer of conspicuous beauty was taken from the 
herd, and the first sacrifice was offered; the Potitii and Pinarii, the two 
principal families in those parts, were invited by Hercules to assist in the 
sacrifice and at the feast which followed. It so happened that the Potitii were 
present at the appointed time, and the entrails were placed before them; the 
Pinarii arrived after these were consumed and came in for the rest of the 
banquet. It became a permanent institution from that time, that as long as the 
family of the Pinarii survived they should not eat of the entrails of the 
victims. The Potitii, after being instructed by Evander, presided over that 
rite for many ages, until they handed over this ministerial office to public 
servants after which the whole race of the Potitii perished. This out of all 
foreign rites, was the only one which Romulus adopted, as though he felt that 
an immortality won through courage, of which this was the memorial, would one 
day be his own reward.

[1.8]After the claims of religion had been duly acknowledged, Romulus called 
his people to a council. As nothing could unite them into one political body 
but the observance of common laws and customs, he gave them a body of laws, 
which he thought would only be respected by a rude and uncivilised race of men 
if he inspired them with awe by assuming the outward symbols of power. He 
surrounded himself with greater state, and in particular he called into his 
service twelve lictors. Some think that he fixed upon this number from the 
number of the birds who foretold his sovereignty; but I am inclined to agree 
with those who think that as this class of public officers was borrowed from 
the same people from whom the "sella curulis" and the "toga praetexta" were 
adopted - their neighbours, the Etruscans - so the number itself also was taken 
from them. Its use amongst the Etruscans is traced to the custom of the twelve 
sovereign cities of Etruria, when jointly electing a king, furnishing him each 
with one lictor. Meantime the City was growing by the extension of its walls in 
various directions; an increase due rather to the anticipation of its future 
population than to any present overcrowding. His next care was to secure an 
addition to the population that the size of the City might not be a source of 
weakness. It had been the ancient policy of the founders of cities to get 
together a multitude of people of obscure and low origin and then to spread the 
fiction that they were the children of the soil. In accordance with this 
policy, Romulus opened a place of refuge on the spot where, as you go down from 
the Capitol, you find an enclosed space between two groves. A promiscuous crowd 
of freemen and slaves, eager for change, fled thither from the neighbouring 
states. This was the first accession of strength to the nascent greatness of 
the city. When he was satisfied as to its strength, his next step was to 
provide for that strength being wisely directed. He created a hundred senators; 
either because that number was adequate, or because there were only a hundred 
heads of houses who could be created. In any case they were called the "Patres" 
in virtue of their rank, and their descendants were called "Patricians." 

[1.18]There was living, in those days, at Cures, a Sabine city, a man of 
renowned justice and piety - Numa Pompilius. He was as conversant as any one in 
that age could be with all divine and human law. His master is given as 
Pythagoras of Samos, as tradition speaks of no other. But this is erroneous, 
for it is generally agreed that it was more than a century later, in the reign 
of Servius Tullius, that Pythagoras gathered round him crowds of eager 
students, in the most distant part of Italy, in the neighbourhood of 
Metapontum, Heraclea, and Crotona. Now, even if he had been contemporary with 
Numa, how could his reputation have reached the Sabines? From what places, and 
in what common language could he have induced any one to become his disciple? 
Who could have guaranteed the safety of a solitary individual travelling 
through so many nations differing in speech and character? I believe rather 
that Numa's virtues were the result of his native temperament and 
self-training, moulded not so much by foreign influences as by the rigorous and 
austere discipline of the ancient Sabines, which was the purest type of any 
that existed in the old days. When Numa's name was mentioned, though the Roman 
senators saw that the balance of power would be on the side of the Sabines if 
the king were chosen from amongst them, still no one ventured to propose a 
partisan of his own, or any senator, or citizen in preference to him. 
Accordingly they all to a man decreed that the crown should be offered to Numa 
Pompilius. He was invited to Rome, and following the precedent set by Romulus, 
when he obtained his crown through the augury which sanctioned the founding of 
the City, Numa ordered that in his case also the gods should be consulted. He 
was solemnly conducted by an augur, who was afterwards honoured by being made a 
State functionary for life, to the Citadel, and took his seat on a stone facing 
south. The augur seated himself on his left hand, with his head covered, and 
holding in his right hand a curved staff without any knots, which they called a 
"lituus." After surveying the prospect over the City and surrounding country, 
he offered prayers and marked out the heavenly regions by an imaginary line 
from east to west; the southern he defined as "the right hand," the northern as 
"the left hand." He then fixed upon an object, as far as he could see, as a 
corresponding mark, and then transferring the lituus to his left hand, he laid 
his right upon Numa's head and offered this prayer: "Father Jupiter, if it be 
heaven's will that this Numa Pompilius, whose head I hold, should be king of 
Rome, do thou signify it to us by sure signs within those boundaries which I 
have traced." Then he described in the usual formula the augury which he 
desired should be sent. They were sent, and Numa being by them manifested to be 
king, came down from the "templum."

[1.19]Having in this way obtained the crown, Numa prepared to found, as it 
were, anew, by laws and customs, that City which had so recently been founded 
by force of arms. He saw that this was impossible whilst a state of war lasted, 
for war brutalised men. Thinking that the ferocity of his subjects might be 
mitigated by the disuse of arms, he built the temple of Janus at the foot of 
the Aventine as an index of peace and war, to signify when it was open that the 
State was under arms, and when it was shut that all the surrounding nations 
were at peace. Twice since Numa's reign has it been shut, once after the first 
Punic war in the consulship of T. Manlius, the second time, which heaven has 
allowed our generation to witness, after the battle of Actium, when peace on 
land and sea was secured by the emperor Caesar Augustus. After forming treaties 
of alliance with all his neighbours and closing the temple of Janus, Numa 
turned his attention to domestic matters. The removal of all danger from 
without would induce his subjects to luxuriate in idleness, as they would be no 
longer restrained by the fear of an enemy or by military discipline. To prevent 
this, he strove to inculcate in their minds the fear of the gods, regarding 
this as the most powerful influence which could act upon an uncivilised and, in 
those ages, a barbarous people. But, as this would fail to make a deep 
impression without some claim to supernatural wisdom, he pretended that he had 
nocturnal interviews with the nymph Egeria: that it was on her advice that he 
was instituting the ritual most acceptable to the gods and appointing for each 
deity his own special priests. First of all he divided the year into twelve 
months, corresponding to the moon's revolutions. But as the moon does not 
complete thirty days in each month, and so there are fewer days in the lunar 
year than in that measured by the course of the sun, he interpolated 
intercalary months and so arranged them that every twentieth year the days 
should coincide with the same position of the sun as when they started, the 
whole twenty years being thus complete. He also established a distinction 
between the days on which legal business could be transacted and those on which 
it could not, because it would sometimes be advisable that there should be no 
business transacted with the people.

[1.20]Next he turned his attention to the appointment of priests. He himself, 
however, conducted a great many religious services, especially those which 
belong to the Flamen of Jupiter. But he thought that in a warlike state there 
would be more kings of the type of Romulus than of Numa who would take the 
field in person. To guard, therefore, against the sacrificial rites which the 
king performed being interrupted, he appointed a Flamen as perpetual priest to 
Jupiter, and ordered that he should wear a distinctive dress and sit in the 
royal curule chair. He appointed two additional Flamens, one for Mars, the 
other for Quirinus, and also chose virgins as priestesses to Vesta. This order 
of priestesses came into existence originally in Alba and was connected with 
the race of the founder. He assigned them a public stipend that they might give 
their whole time to the temple, and made their persons sacred and inviolable by 
a vow of chastity and other religious sanctions. Similarly he chose twelve 
"Salii" for Mars Gradivus, and assigned to them the distinctive dress of an 
embroidered tunic and over it a brazen cuirass. They were instructed to march 
in solemn procession through the City, carrying the twelve shields called the 
"Ancilia," and singing hymns accompanied by a solemn dance in triple time. The 
next office to be filled was that of the Pontifex Maximus. Numa appointed the 
son of Marcus, one of the senators - Numa Marcius - and all the regulations 
bearing on religion, written out and sealed, were placed in his charge. Here 
was laid down with what victims, on what days, and at what temples the various 
sacrifices were to be offered, and from what sources the expenses connected 
with them were to be defrayed. He placed all other sacred functions, both 
public and private, under the supervision of the Pontifex, in order that there 
might be an authority for the people to consult, and so all trouble and 
confusion arising through foreign rites being adopted and their ancestral ones 
neglected might be avoided. Nor were his functions confined to directing the 
worship of the celestial gods; he was to instruct the people how to conduct 
funerals and appease the spirits of the departed, and what prodigies sent by 
lightning or in any other way were to be attended to and expiated. To elicit 
these signs of the divine will, he dedicated an altar to Jupiter Elicius on the 
Aventine, and consulted the god through auguries, as to which prodigies were to 
receive attention. 

[1.42]Servius consolidated his power quite as much by his private as by his 
public measures. To guard against the children of Tarquin treating him as those 
of Ancus had treated Tarquin, he married his two daughters to the scions of the 
royal house, Lucius and Arruns Tarquin. Human counsels could not arrest the 
inevitable course of destiny, nor could Servius prevent the jealousy aroused by 
his ascending the throne from making his family the scene of disloyalty and 
hatred. The truce with the Veientines had now expired, and the resumption of 
war with them and other Etruscan cities came most opportunely to help in 
maintaining tranquillity at home. In this war the courage and good fortune of 
Tullius were conspicuous, and he returned to Rome, after defeating an immense 
force of the enemy, feeling quite secure on the throne, and assured of the 
goodwill of both patricians and commons. Then he set himself to by far the 
greatest of all works in times of peace. Just as Numa had been the author of 
religious laws and institutions, so posterity extols Servius as the founder of 
those divisions and classes in the State by which a clear distinction is drawn 
between the various grades of dignity and fortune. He instituted the census, a 
most beneficial institution in what was to be a great empire, in order that by 
its means the various duties of peace and war might be assigned, not as 
heretofore, indiscriminately, but in proportion to the amount of property each 
man possessed. From it he drew up the classes and centuries and the following 
distribution of them, adapted for either peace or war.

[1.43]Those whose property amounted to, or exceeded 100,000 lbs. weight of 
copper were formed into eighty centuries, forty of juniors and forty of 
seniors. These were called the First Class. The seniors were to defend the 
City, the juniors to serve in the field. The armour which they were to provide 
themselves with comprised helmet, round shield, greaves, and coat of mail, all 
of brass; these were to protect the person. Their offensive weapons were spear 
and sword. To this class were joined two centuries of carpenters whose duty it 
was to work the engines of war; they were without arms. The Second Class 
consisted of those whose property amounted to between 75,000 and 100,000 lbs. 
weight of copper; they were formed, seniors and juniors together, into twenty 
centuries. Their regulation arms were the same as those of the First Class, 
except that they had an oblong wooden shield instead of the round brazen one 
and no coat of mail. The Third Class he formed of those whose property fell as 
low as 50,000 lbs.; these also consisted of twenty centuries, similarly divided 
into seniors and juniors. The only difference in the armour was that they did 
not wear greaves. In the Fourth Class were those whose property did not fall 
below 25,000 lbs. They also formed twenty centuries; their only arms were a 
spear and a javelin. The Fifth Class was larger it formed thirty centuries. 
They carried slings and stones, and they included the supernumeraries, the 
horn-blowers, and the trumpeters, who formed three centuries. This Fifth Class 
was assessed at 11,000 lbs. The rest of the population whose property fell 
below this were formed into one century and were exempt from military service.

After thus regulating the equipment and distribution of the infantry, he 
re-arranged the cavalry. He enrolled from amongst the principal men of the 
State twelve centuries. In the same way he made six other centuries (though 
only three had been formed by Romulus) under the same names under which the 
first had been inaugurated. For the purchase of the horse, 10,000 lbs. were 
assigned them from the public treasury; whilst for its keep certain widows were 
assessed to pay 2000 lbs. each, annually. The burden of all these expenses was 
shifted from the poor on to the rich. Then additional privileges were 
conferred. The former kings had maintained the constitution as handed down by 
Romulus, viz., manhood suffrage in which all alike possessed the same weight 
and enjoyed the same rights. Servius introduced a graduation; so that whilst no 
one was ostensibly deprived of his vote, all the voting power was in the hands 
of the principal men of the State. The knights were first summoned to record 
their vote, then the eighty centuries of the infantry of the First Class; if 
their votes were divided, which seldom happened, it was arranged for the Second 
Class to be summoned; very seldom did the voting extend to the lowest Class. 
Nor need it occasion any surprise, that the arrangement which now exists since 
the completion of the thirty-five tribes, their number being doubled by the 
centuries of juniors and seniors, does not agree with the total as instituted 
by Servius Tullius. For, after dividing the City with its districts and the 
hills which were inhabited into four parts, he called these divisions "tribes," 
I think from the tribute they paid, for he also introduced the practice of 
collecting it at an equal rate according to the assessment. These tribes had 
nothing to do with the distribution and number of the centuries.

[1.44]The work of the census was accelerated by an enactment in which Servius 
denounced imprisonment and even capital punishment against those who evaded 
assessment. On its completion he issued an order that all the citizens of Rome, 
knights and infantry alike, should appear in the Campus Martius, each in their 
centuries. After the whole army had been drawn up there, he purified it by the 
triple sacrifice of a swine, a sheep, and an ox. This was called "a closed 
lustrum," because with it the census was completed. Eighty thousand citizens 
are said to have been included in that census. Fabius Pictor, the oldest of our 
historians, states that this was the number of those who could bear arms. To 
contain that population it was obvious that the City would have to be enlarged. 
He added to it the two hills - the Quirinal and the Viminal - and then made a 
further addition by including the Esquiline, and to give it more importance he 
lived there himself. He surrounded the City with a mound and moats and wall; in 
this way he extended the "pomoerium." Looking only to the etymology of the 
word, they explain "pomoerium" as "postmoerium"; but it is rather a 
"circamoerium." For the space which the Etruscans of old, when founding their 
cities, consecrated in accordance with auguries and marked off by boundary 
stones at intervals on each side, as the part where the wall was to be carried, 
was to be kept vacant so that no buildings might connect with the wall on the 
inside (whilst now they generally touch), and on the outside some ground might 
remain virgin soil untouched by cultivation. This space, which it was forbidden 
either to build upon or to plough, and which could not be said to be behind the 
wall any more than the wall could be said to be behind it, the Romans called 
the "pomoerium." As the City grew, these sacred boundary stones were always 
moved forward as far as the walls were advanced.

[1.45]After the State was augmented by the expansion of the City and all 
domestic arrangements adapted to the requirements of both peace and war, 
Servius endeavoured to extend his dominion by state-craft, instead of 
aggrandising it by arms, and at the same time made an addition to the adornment 
of the City. The temple of the Ephesian Diana was famous at that time, and it 
was reported to have been built by the co-operation of the states of Asia. 
Servius had been careful to form ties of hospitality and friendship with the 
chiefs of the Latin nation, and he used to speak in the highest praise of that 
co-operation and the common recognition of the same deity. By constantly 
dwelling on this theme he at length induced the Latin tribes to join with the 
people of Rome in building a temple to Diana in Rome. Their doing so was an 
admission of the predominance of Rome; a question which had so often been 
disputed by arms. Though the Latins, after their many unfortunate experiences 
in war, had as a nation laid aside all thoughts of success, there was amongst 
the Sabines one man who believed that an opportunity presented itself of 
recovering the supremacy through his own individual cunning. The story runs 
that a man of substance belonging to that nation had a heifer of marvellous 
size and beauty. The marvel was attested in after ages by the horns which were 
fastened up in the vestibule of the temple of Diana. The creature was looked 
upon as - what it really was - a prodigy, and the soothsayers predicted that, 
whoever sacrificed it to Diana, the state of which he was a citizen should be 
the seat of empire. This prophecy had reached the ears of the official in 
charge of the temple of Diana. When the first day on which the sacrifice could 
properly be offered arrived, the Sabine drove the heifer to Rome, took it to 
the temple, and placed it in front of the altar. The official in charge was a 
Roman, and, struck by the size of the victim, which was well known by report, 
he recalled the prophecy and addressing the Sabine, said, "Why, pray, are you, 
stranger, preparing to offer a polluted sacrifice to Diana? Go and bathe 
yourself first in running water. The Tiber is flowing down there at the bottom 
of the valley." Filled with misgivings, and anxious for everything to be done 
properly that the prediction might be fulfilled, the stranger promptly went 
down to the Tiber. Meanwhile the Roman sacrificed the heifer to Diana. This was 
a cause of intense gratification to the king and to his people. 

[1.56]Determined to finish his temple, he sent for workmen from all parts of 
Etruria, and not only used the public treasury to defray the cost, but also 
compelled the plebeians to take their share of the work. This was in addition 
to their military service, and was anything but a light burden. Still they felt 
it less of a hardship to build the temples of the gods with their own hands, 
than they did afterwards when they were transferred to other tasks less 
imposing, but involving greater toil - the construction of the "ford" in the 
Circus and that of the Cloaca Maxima, a subterranean tunnel to receive all the 
sewage of the City. The magnificence of these two works could hardly be 
equalled by anything in the present day. When the plebeians were no longer 
required for these works, he considered that such a multitude of unemployed 
would prove a burden to the State, and as he wished the frontiers of the empire 
to be more widely colonised, he sent colonists to Signia and Circeii to serve 
as a protection to the City by land and sea. While he was carrying out these 
undertakings a frightful portent appeared; a snake gliding out of a wooden 
column created confusion and panic in the palace. The king himself was not so 
much terrified as filled with anxious forebodings. The Etruscan soothsayers 
were only employed to interpret prodigies which affected the State; but this 
one concerned him and his house personally, so he decided to send to the 
world-famed oracle of Delphi. Fearing to entrust the oracular response to any 
one else, he sent two of his sons to Greece, through lands at that time unknown 
and over seas still less known. Titus and Arruns started on their journey. They 
had as a travelling companion L. Junius Brutus, the son of the king's sister, 
Tarquinia, a young man of a very different character from that which he had 
assumed. When he heard of the massacre of the chiefs of the State, amongst them 
his own brother, by his uncle's orders, he determined that his intelligence 
should give the king no cause for alarm nor his fortune any provocation to his 
avarice, and that as the laws afforded no protection, he would seek safety in 
obscurity and neglect. Accordingly he carefully kept up the appearance and 
conduct of an idiot, leaving the king to do what he liked with his person and 
property, and did not even protest against his nickname of "Brutus"; for under 
the protection of that nickname the soul which was one day to liberate Rome was 
awaiting its destined hour. The story runs that when brought to Delphi by the 
Tarquins, more as a butt for their sport than as a companion, he had with him a 
golden staff enclosed in a hollow one of corner wood, which he offered to 
Apollo as a mystical emblem of his own character. After executing their 
father's commission the young men were desirous of ascertaining to which of 
them the kingdom of Rome would come. A voice came from the lowest depths of the 
cavern: "Whichever of you, young men, shall be the first to kiss his mother, he 
shall hold supreme sway in Rome." Sextus had remained behind in Rome, and to 
keep him in ignorance of this oracle and so deprive him of any chance of coming 
to the throne, the two Tarquins insisted upon absolute silence being kept on 
the subject. They drew lots to decide which of them should be the first to kiss 
his mother on their return to Rome. Brutus, thinking that the oracular 
utterance had another meaning, pretended to stumble, and as he fell kissed the 
ground, for the earth is of course the common mother of us all. Then they 
returned to Rome, where preparations were being energetically pushed forward 
for a war with the Rutulians. 
